Vincent Ricciardi, PhD

Data Scientist | Sustainability Scientist

VinnyRicciardi@gmail.com | VinnyRicciardi.github.io

**EDUCATION**

**PhD in Resource Management & Environmental Studies**, University of
British Columbia 2019

**MSc in Geography**, Pennsylvania State University 2014

**BA in Psychology,** Kalamazoo College 2009

**SKILLS**

**Coding** Python (5 years), R (7 years), Bash/Unix (4 years)

**Skillsets** Inferential Statistics, Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) - Spatial Analysis,

Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing (NLP), Network Analysis

**EMPLOYMENT**

**Jr Data Scientist,** World Bank 2019 – Present

*Data scientist for high-impact data communication publications*

Lead author for chapter in flagship report with over 1 million downloads
per year (WDR)

Curated open-access environmental database with over 120k visitors a
year (WDI)

Lead environmental scientist for data journalism and visualization
project (SDG Atlas)

**PhD Student & Research Assistant,** University of British Columbia
2015 – 2019

*10 publications in 4 years. 3 are in the top 5% of most discussed out
of 14 million ranked*

Gates Foundation Led team to build NLP models to automate meta-analysis

United Nations FAO Built mixed models to validate a dataset of over 3
million farmers

CGIAR Big Data Platform Spatially modeled a global baseline on farmer
cell phone use

Canada Research Grant Led team to harmonize agricultural data from 55
countries

**Independent Consultant,** Cambodia, Ghana, Thailand, Vietnam 2010 –
2015

*Led field research teams. Communicated project impacts to ministry
members and funders*

USAID Subcontract Value chain assessment for sweet potatoes

USAID Subcontract Needs assessment for national agriculture education
centers

iDE Spatial analyses for program assessments

ECHO Asia Led field work and germination trials on indigenous crops
species

**Research Assistant**

*5 publications in 3 years*

Pennsylvania State University Modeled land-use and disease outbreak,
Ghana 2012 - 2014

Massachusetts Institute of Technology Collated material for neuroscience
study 2007

**TEACHING EXPERIENCE / LECTURES**

**American University Washington College of Law**, Washington, DC 2018

*Panelist* Bridging law and science in the right to food

**Food and Agricultural Organization**, Santiago, Chile 2018

*Guest Lecturer* How much food do smallholders produce?

**World Resource Institute**, Washington, DC 2016

*Guest Lecturer* Social network analysis: a primer

**University of British Columbia**, Vancouver, BC, Canada 2016

*Teaching Assistant* Analytic Methods in Sustainability Science ENVR 440

**American University**, Phnom Penh, Cambodia 2015

*Guest Lecturer* GIS Technical Workshop

**iDE**, Phnom Penh, Cambodia 2015

*Lecturer* GIS Technical Workshop

**Pennsylvania State University**, State College, PA 2012

*Teaching Assistant* Human/Environment Geography GEOG 30

**ECHO Asia Impact Center**, Chiang Mai, Thailand 2010

*Guest Lecturer* Small-Scale Biofuel Production in SE Asia

**SELECTED AWARDS**

**Public Scholar Initiative Research Fellow**, University of British
Columbia 7k CAD 2017

**Liu Doctoral Scholar**, University of British Columbia - 2016

**Four Year Doctoral Fellowship (4YF)**, University of British Columbia
72k CAD 2015

**Research Assistant Award**, University of British Columbia 48k USD
2014

**Research Assistant Award**, Pennsylvania State University 36k USD 2014

**Indigenous Knowledge Research Grant**, Pennsylvania State University
2k USD 2013

**Africana Research Center Research Grant**, Pennsylvania State
University 2k USD 2013

**Senior Leadership Recognition Award**, Kalamazoo College - 2009

**Sharing Time and Resources Award**, Kalamazoo Michigan City Council -
2007

**SELECTED PUBLICATIONS**

1.  **Ricciardi**, V., Ramankutty, N., Mehrabi, Z., Wittman, H.,
    James, D. Smaller farms are consistently higher yielding and more
    biodiverse than large farms: A meta-analysis. Nature Sustainability.
    *In Review*.

2.  Mehrabi, Z., **Ricciardi**, V., Levers, C., McDowell, M. The global
    digital divide in data-driven agriculture. Science Advances. *In
    Review.*

3.  Ramankutty, N., **Ricciardi**, V., Mehrabi, Z., Seufert, V. 2019.
    Trade-offs in the performance of alternative farming systems.
    Agricultural Economics. *In Press.*

4.  Khoury, D., Kisel, Y., Kantar, M., Barber, E., **Ricciardi**, V.,
    Klirs, C., Kucera, L., Mehrabi, Z., Johnson, N., Klabin, S. and
    Valiño, Á., 2019. Science–graphic art partnerships to increase
    research impact. Nature Communications Biology, 2(1): 1-5.

5.  McDowell, G., Huggle, C., Frey, H., Wang, F., **Ricciardi**, V.,
    Cramer, K. 2018. Adaptation action and research in glaciated
    mountain systems: Are they enough to meet the challenge of climate
    change? Global Environmental Change. 54: 19-30.

6.  **Ricciardi**, V., Ramankutty, N., Mehrabi, Z., Jarvis, L.,
    Chookolingo, B. 2018. How much of our world’s food do smallholders
    produce? Global Food Security, 17: 64-72.

7.  **Ricciardi**, V., Ramankutty, N., Mehrabi, Z., Jarvis, L.,
    Chookolingo, B. 2018. An open-access dataset of crop production by
    farm size from agricultural censuses and surveys. Data in Brief, 19:
    1970-1988.

8.  Cohn, A., Newton, P., Gil, J., Kuhl, L., Samberg, L., **Ricciardi**,
    V., Manly, J. R., Northrop, S. 2017. Smallholder agriculture and
    climate change. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 42(1).

9.  Glenna, L., Borlu, Y., Gill, T., Larson, J., **Ricciardi**, V.,
    Adam, R. 2017. Food security, sweet potato production, and proximity
    to markets in northern Ghana. FACETS, 2(2): 919-936.

10. Gill, T. B., **Ricciardi**, V., Bates, R., James, D. 2017. Capacity
    development in agricultural education and training in Cambodia: a
    SWOT analysis. The Journal of Agricultural Education and Extension,
    24(1): 34-51.

11. Tschakert, P., **Ricciardi**, V., Machado, M., Ferring, D.,
    Smithwick, E. Hausermann, H., Parker, E. 2016. Situated knowledge of
    pathogenic landscapes in Ghana: understanding the emergence of
    Buruli ulcer through qualitative analysis. Social Science and
    Medicine, (150): 170-171.

12. **Ricciardi**, V. 2015. Homophily as a Safety Net: Investigating
    when smallholder farmers decide to buy hybrid seed in northern
    Ghana. IK: Other Ways of Knowing, 1(2): 65-97.

13. **Ricciardi**, V. 2015. Social seed networks: identifying central
    farmers for equitable seed access. Agri. Systems, 139: 110-121.

14. Wu, J., Tschakert, P., Klutse, E., Ferring, D., **Ricciardi**, V.,
    Hausermann, H., Oppong, J., Smithwick, E. A. 2015. Buruli ulcer
    disease and its association with land cover in southwestern Ghana.
    PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 9(6): e0003840.

15. Gill, T. B., Bates, R., Bicksler, A., Burnette, R., **Ricciardi**,
    V., Yoder, L. 2013. Strengthening informal seed systems to enhance
    food security in Southeast Asia. Journal of Agriculture, Food
    Systems, and Community Development, 3(3): 139-153.

16. Bates, R., Gill, T. B., Bicksler, A., Yoder, L., Burnette, R., and
    **Ricciardi**, V. 2013. Designing strategies and systems to
    identify, preserve and promote underutilized indigenous crop
    species. Acta Horticulturae, 979: 569-576.

17. Bicksler, A., Bates, R., Burnette, R., Gill, T. B., Yoder, L.,
    **Ricciardi**, V., Srigiofun, Y. 2012. Methodologies for
    strengthening informal indigenous vegetable seed systems in Northern
    Thailand and Cambodia. Acta Horticulturae, 958: 67-74.

**\
**

**Non-Refereed Publications and Reports to Sponsors**

1.  **Ricciardi**, V. 2015. Project documentation report: scaling-up
    productive water through micro-irrigation technologies. iDE Vietnam.
    Project supported by the Swiss Agency for Development & Cooperation
    (SDC).

2.  **Ricciardi**, V. 2015. Latrine business owners to customer sales
    network in rural Cambodia: 2012-2014; Supply chain management
    geographical atlas. iDE Sanitation Marketing Scale-Up (SMSU) 2.0.
    Project supported by the World Bank’s Water and Sanitation Program
    (WSP).

3.  **Ricciardi**, V. 2015. Toilet sales and access to sanitation in
    rural Cambodia; geographical atlas. iDE Sanitation Marketing
    Scale-Up (SMSU) 1.0. Project supported by the World Bank’s Water and
    Sanitation Program (WSP).

4.  **Ricciardi**, V., R. Bates, T. Gill. 2014. Report for InnovATE
    scoping visit, Cambodia. USAID Subcontract report. InnovATE in
    Cambodia.

5.  **Ricciardi**, V., Borlu, Y., Gill, T. 2014. Fact-sheet*:* Sweet
    potato seed system in northern Ghana*.* USAID Horticultural CRISP
    report. Sustainable Technology for Orange and Purple Sweet potato
    (STOPS) in Ghana.

6.  Borlu, Y., **Ricciardi**, V. 2014. Fact-sheet*:* Perceptions and
    attitudes towards sweet potatoes in northern Ghana. USAID
    Horticultural CRSP report. Sustainable Technology for Orange and
    Purple Sweet potato (STOPS) in Ghana.

7.  Meitzner Yoder, L. and **Ricciardi**, V. January 2012. Seed fairs:
    Fostering local seed exchange to support regional biodiversity. Echo
    Asia Notes.

8.  Bicksler, A., Burnette, R., **Ricciardi**, V. Bell, M., Shapland, P.
    2011. Seed germination cabinet. Fact-sheet: Strengthening indigenous
    informal seed systems in Southeast Asia. Project supported by USAID
    Horticultural CRSP.

**CONFERENCE PRESENTATIONS**

1.  **Ricciardi**, V., Ramankutty, N., Mehrabi, Z., Wittman, H.,
    James, D. 2019. Smaller farms are consistently higher yielding and
    biodiverse than large farms: A meta-analysis. Global Land Project.
    Bern, Switzerland. **Top Conference Paper Award**.

2.  McDowell, G., Huggel, C., Frey, H., Wang, F., Cramer, K.,
    **Ricciardi**, V. 2019. Adaptation action and research in glaciated
    mountain systems: Are they enough to meet the challenge of climate
    change? International Mountain Conference. Innsbruck, Austria.

3.  McDowell, G., Huggel, C., Frey, H., Wang, F., Cramer, K.,
    **Ricciardi, V.** 2018. Adaptation and the challenge of climate
    change in glaciated mountain regions: a global progress report.
    World Mountain Forum. Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan.

4.  **Ricciardi**, V., Ramankutty, N., Mehrabi, Z., Wittman, H.,
    James, D. 2018. Systematic review: transition in global farm size.
    SESYNC Boundary Spanning Symposium. Annapolis, MD, USA.

5.  **Ricciardi**, V., Ramankutty, N., Mehrabi, Z., Jarvis, L.,
    Chookolingo, B. 2017. How much of our world’s food do smallholders
    produce? Third International Conference on Global Food Security.
    Cape Town, South Africa.

6.  **Ricciardi**, V., Ramankutty, N. 2016. Yield stability and farm
    size: investigating 40 years of variability in India’s rice
    production. Global Land Project. Beijing, China.

7.  **Ricciardi**, V. 2016. Commentator. Workshop on Innovation,
    Precaution, and Sustainability. W. Maurice Young Centre for Applied
    Ethics: University of British Columbia. Vancouver, BC, Canada.

8.  **Ricciardi**, V. 2016. Is crop production of India’s small farms
    more stable than large farms in response to climate variability?
    Association of American Geographers Annual Conference. San
    Francisco, CA, USA.

9.  Larson, J., Gill, T., Borlu, Y., **Ricciardi**, V., Martey, E. 2014.
    STOPS: Sustainable Technologies for Orange and Purple Sweet Potatoes
    in Ghana. Annual USAID Innovation Lab Meeting. Tegucigalpa,
    Honduras.

10. **Ricciardi**, V. 2014. Effects of crop introduction on informal
    seed systems in Northern Ghana: a social network approach.
    Association of American Geographers Annual Conference. Tampa,
    Florida, USA.

11. **Ricciardi**, V. 2014. Effects of commercial crop introduction on
    informal seed systems: Northern Ghana. Inter-institutional
    Consortium of Indigenous Knowledge. State College, PA, USA.

12. **Ricciardi**, V. 2013. Agrobiodiversity conservation and food
    security in West Africa: Can we have both? International
    Agricultural Speaker Series, Pennsylvania State University. State
    College, PA, USA.


