- The scale of agricultural production is rapidly changing. Farms are getting larger and more mechanized in high income countries, yet smaller and more fragmented in low income countries.
- To the sustainable agricultural movements, these trends indicates a greater disconnect from the food system and more environmentally detrimental production practices. 
- To the development community, these trends may put resource poor smallholders (farmers operating small farms often for subsistence) at greater risk to international markets and variable climate. 
- The transition in the scale of agriculture has motivated recent international policy calls to combat inequities in the food system and to promote more environmentally friendly production practices (e.g., Sustainable Development Goals and Intended Nationally Determined Contributions).
	- Inequitities, such as:
		- Larger farms benefit from more government and industry support. 
		- Smallholder farmers are largely food insecure
- Despite this large global transition in agriculture, the scientific community does not know much about the relationship between the change in farms size and its production, economic, and environmental implications.
- Yet, there has been limited synthesis of the scientific work on farm size and limited cross-regional or global studies to monitor this transition, such as:
	- Only until 2016, did we have global numbers on how many farmers were in the world and how many of them were on small farms. About 470 million of the 580 million farmers in teh world operate farms under 2 ha (about the size of 2 U.S. style football fields).
	- In 2017, there were two modeling studies that estimated how much food and what type of nutrients different farm sizes produce in the world
- My work extends on this past, limited work to understand what social, environmental, and production implications the transition to different farm sizes has 
	- In 2018, our team had the first study that took farmer answered surveys to understand how much food versus feed, seed, processed commodities, and post-harvest loss different farm sizes produce. Our results refined and verified the previous 2 modeling studies, where farms under 2 ha produce around 30% of the world's food. 
	- In 2018, we also synthesized much of the scientific literature available on how trends in farm size effect the global food supply, food producers, and the environment. 
		- Smaller farms have greater productivity (higher yields) and foster more crop and non-crop biodiversity than larger farms. The higher yields are most likely due to many smaller farms having a lot more family members to provide labor and attention to the crops. The greater crop diversity stems from smaller farms often eat what they grow and grow speciality crops that large farms don't grow. Smaller farms usually have smaller fields than larger farms (not always!) and many types of animals and plants like the edges that small fields provide, so plots on small farms and landscapes with more small farms tend to have more biodiversity.
		- Smaller farms are less profitable than larger farms per hectare and not as resource efficient, where they produce more greenhouse gasses per unit produced than larer farms. These two findings may be because smaller farms have a difficulty getting their crops to markets at a decent price and many of the technologies available to larger farms aren't designed for smaller farms.
		- There were only 5 studies, so results are not conclusive, but all of the studies found that larger farms were more food secure / had better access to diverse, nutritious diets than smaller farms. This was largely due to larger farms being able to purchase food and not rely on growing thier own food to eat.
	- One large concern that we still don't know about farm size is, how are differently sized farms affected by climate change and what type of support can is appropriate to help each type of farm adapt to climate change?
		- That will be the next stage of research, to be completed in 2019.